# PA0: Intro. to Rust

Your goal in this assignment is to familiarize yourself with Rust, the programming language we'll be using for much of this course. To do so, you'll implement a couple small programs, first a Reverse Polish Notation calculator (about which more below); then a second program that analyzes the space complexity of RPN programs.

## Part 0: Set Up Your Rust/Git Environment 

Before you get started, make sure you've completed the reading for the first two weeks of the course -- Chapters 1-6 and 8 of [The Rust Book](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/index.html).

Follow the instructions at [Starting with Rust](../starting-rust.md) or those in Chapter 1 of [The Rust Book](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/index.html) to install Rust on your local machine. When we run your code, we'll be using Rust version `1.49.0` in a Linux environment. Make sure you have exactly that version.

You will develop and submit your assignment through GitHub. To start this process, first *accept the assignment* by visiting [https://classroom.github.com/a/FUyYjFEB](https://classroom.github.com/a/FUyYjFEB) (this will create a new private repository in which you should develop your solution). Clone the repository onto your local machine in order to begin working. Your last commit to this repository before the due date will count as your assignment submission. If you forget how to use Git and/or GitHub, read more online (e.g., [https://product.hubspot.com/blog/git-and-github-tutorial-for-beginners](https://product.hubspot.com/blog/git-and-github-tutorial-for-beginners)).

Rust uses a build system and package manager called [Cargo](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/). For this assignment, you'll create three Cargo projects corresponding to the assignment's three parts by typing the following commands from within your GitHub repo for the assignment:

```bash
cargo init rpn      #Part I
cargo init analyze  #Part II
cargo init optimize #Part III
```

To compile the code for, e.g., Part I, `cd` into the `rpn` directory, then type `cargo build`. To run your code directly, do `cargo run`.

## Part I: Reverse Polish Notation Calculator (rpn)

A Reverse Polish Notation (RPN) calculator uses a stack to perform arithmetic operations expressed in so-called *post-fix* style -- the operation to be performed appears after, or *post*, the operands on which the operation is executed.

For example, here's a valid input to an RPN calculator like the one you'll be building in this assignment:

```
1 2 + done
```

the result of which is `3`. At the level of an underlying stack operation of an RPN calculator, this program executes roughly the following pseudocode:

| Operation | Stack |
| --------- | ----- |
| push 1    | [1]   |
| push 2    | [1; 2] |
| op +      | [3] |

The **Stack** column depicts the stack (with head to the right) *after* the **Operation** listed directly to the left.

Here's a slightly longer RPN program

```
1 2 + 4 + 5 - 6 7 8 * + + 
```

 and its associated trace of stack operations:

| Operation | Stack |
| --------- | ----- |
| push 1    | [1]   |
| push 2    | [1; 2] |
| op +      | [3] |
| push 4    | [3; 4] |
| op +      | [7] |
| push 5    | [7; 5] |
| op -      | [2] |
| push 6    | [2; 6] |
| push 7    | [2; 6; 7] |
| push 8    | [2; 6; 7; 8] |
| op *      | [2; 6; 56] |
| op +      | [2; 62] |
| op +      | [64] |

### Your Task 

Implement a calculator for arithmetic programs written in RPN style, as specified by the following grammar:

```
Binary Operators
b ::= + | - | * | /
 
Terms
t ::= n       // 32-bit signed integers, e.g., -1, 2, 256, 0, ...
    | b       // Binary operator
    | save    // Pop from the main stack, pushing the value onto an auxiliary stack 
    | restore // Pop from the auxiliary stack, pushing the value onto the main stack

RPN Programs
p ::= t_0 t_1 ... t_n done
```

That is, a valid RPN program is a series of `n` terms, `t_0 t_1 ... t_n`, followed by the keyword `done`. Both the example programs given above are valid according to this grammar.

The special commands `save` and `restore` allow the programmer to save values from the calculator's main stack onto an auxiliary stack for later computation. Here's a program that calculates the sum of two numbers, then uses `save` and `restore` to subtract the result from 0.

```
7 8 + save 0 restore - done
```

with stack trace:

| Operation | Main Stack | Auxiliary Stack | 
| --------- | ---------- | --------------- | 
| push 7    | [7]        | [] |
| push 8    | [7; 8]     | [] |
| op +      | [15]       | [] |
| save 15   | []         | [15] |
| push 0    | [0]        | [15] |
| restore 15| [0, 15]    | [] |
| op -      | [-15]      | [] |


The special term `done` must appear at the end of every valid RPN program, and has the effect of printing out the top value on the main stack (if any), then terminating the program. It's an error if `done` is encountered with no values on the stack.

Note: If there is anything after the keyword `done`, the program should compile and run, it will just ignore everything after `done`.

**Examples**

| Program | Result |
| ------- | ------ |
| `1 2 3 done` | `3` |
| `1 2 + 3 + 4 + 5 + done` | `15` |
| `1 2 3 4 5 + + + + done` | `15` |
| `1 2 + save 3 restore + done` | `6` |
| `1 2 + done 3 4 5 done` | `3` |
| `10 2 / save 7 restore - done` | `2` |

### Specifics

1. Write a program, `<your-repo>/rpn/src/main.rs`, that reads RPN programs on `stdin` and prints their results on `stdout`, assuming the keyword `done` is encountered. Your program may assume, as in the grammar above, that the terms in each RPN program are whitespace-separated.

2. When printing the result of a valid RPN program, include no newline characters (hint: use `print!` instead of `println!`).

3. On valid RPN programs, your RPN interpreter should return exit code `0`. On invalid RPN programs (those that attempt to perform operations without sufficient arguments for example), your interpreter should return with a non-zero exit code.

4. On or before the due date, commit your final submission to your GitHub repo for this assignment.

### Errors 

The following are errors on which your interpreter should exit with a non-zero error code:

* Performing an operation, like `*`, with insufficient integers on the stack
* Attempting to `save` when there are no values on the main stack
* Attempting to `restore` when there are no values on the auxiliary stack
* Performing `done` when there are no values on the main stack

## Part II: RPN Analyzer (analyze)

Certain RPN programs are ill-formed, like the following which attempts to perform an addition operation with too few integers on the stack:

```
1 2 + + done
```

| Operation | Main Stack |
| --------- | ---------- |
| push 1    | [2]        | 
| push 2    | [1; 2]     |
| op +      | [3]        |
| op +      | [?]        |

In the second part of this assignment, you'll implement a program that analyzes an RPN program to determine (1) whether it is well formed (won't produce errors when run) and (2) if it is well formed, how large a stack the program will require to run. 

In general, RPN programs may require stacks that scale with the size of the program being executed. For example:

```
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 ... N + ... + + + + + + + done
```

pushes a bunch of integers, from `1` to `N` for some large `N`, then repeatedly adds the results until only the sum of all the values `1` to `N` is left on the stack. 

### Your Task

Write a program, `<your-repo>/analyze/src/main.rs`, that reads the same input as the program from Part I but instead outputs:

* `-1` if the RPN program on `stdin` was invalid according to the grammar or will attempt an operation with insufficient arguments on the stack; or 
* `N` if the the RPN program on `stdin` was valid, where `N` is the maximum number of stack slots required **total**, in both the main and auxiliary stacks, to execute the program.

**Examples**

| Program | Result | Reason         |
| ------- | ------ | -------------- |
| `1 2 3 done` | `3` |              |
| `1 2 3`      | `-1` | Missing `done` | 
| `1 2 + 3 + 4 + 5 + done` | `2` | |
| `1 2 3 4 5 + + + + done` | `5` | |
| `1 2 + save 3 restore + done` | `3` | Main stack 2 + auxiliary stack 1 |
| `1 2 + done 3 4 5 done` | `2` | All code after the first `done` is ignored |
| `2 0 / done` | `2` | |

Note that RPN programs containing division by zero are not considered invalid. Consider, for example, the program `2 1 1 - / done`. It is not clear statically that a division by zero will occur; we must first evaluate `1 1 -` in order to see it. In general, we must be willing to evaluate the entire program if we want to detect division by zero errors, and thus must maintain a main and auxiliary stack just as the RPN program does. By choosing *not* to detect division by zero errors, we can, in principle (and I would suggest that you do in practice), implement the analyzer using constant space (that is, without a stack that could grow linearly in the size of the program as the analyzer executes).

### Specifics 

1. Write a program, `<your-repo>/analyze/src/main.rs`, that reads RPN programs on `stdin` and outputs either `-1` or `N` on `stdout`, where `N` is the number of stack slots required to execute the program and `-1` indicates an invalid RPN program as described above.

2. On or before the due date, commit your final submission to your GitHub repo for this assignment.

## Part III: RPN Optimizer (optimize, EC)

**This part is extra credit.**

Certain RPN programs, like `1 2 3 4 5 + + + + done`, can be rewritten to save space (an equivalent program that uses only two stack slots is `1 2 + 3 + 4 + 5 + done`). For a small amount of extra credit:

1. Implement a third program, `<your-repo>/optimize/src/main.rs`, that reads an RPN program from `stdin` and prints to `stdout` a version of the program that uses as few stack slots as possible. The program you print out should perform exactly the same operations read but possibly in a different order. You may assume that the input program contains no 'save' or 'restore' operations (and thus does not make use of the auxiliary stack), and the optimized program should also not use 'save' or 'restore'.

2. In a comment at the top of your program, explain your optimization strategy or algorithm.

3. Commit your program to your GitHub repo for this assignment.
