# PA5: Optional assignment

This assignment is purely optional. If you choose to do it, it will replace your lowest PA grade (provided that it's higher). It is an individual assignment, so no collaboration is allowed (except for high-level discussion).

There are two options to choose from, each worth a maximum of 5 points (or a grand total of 6 points for both).

## Option 1

#### Part 1 (4 points)

Extend your Grumpy language implementation to support 'while' loops and a 'print' expression for printing values to stdout.

```
e ::= ...                 // Everything from before.
      (while econd ebody) // While loop with guard condition econd and body ebody.
      (print e)           // Print the value of e followed by a newline.
```

This extension will touch many components of the Grumpy system. Concretely, it includes extending:

* the ir::Exp type with constructors for the new expression forms.
* the bound_vars method to support the new Exp constructors.
* the GrumpyIR parser to support parsing the new expression forms.
* the compiler to generate code for the new Exp constructors.
* the Grumpy assembly language and VM to support a 'print' instruction that pops the top value on the stack and prints it to stdout. Note that the VM is already capable of supporting 'while' loops via conditional branching.

When compiling 'print' expressions, don't forget about the compilation invariant (hint: the type of a 'print' expression is unit).

Your executable should implement the entire pipeline from reading in the .gpy program to printing out the final result (by internally compiling the program to assembly, assembling it to bytecode, and then running it in the vm).

#### Part 2 (1 additional point)

Extend GrumpyIR further with expression forms for 'size' expressions and 'foreach' loops.

```
e ::= ...                    // Everything from before.
      (foreach x earr ebody) // Foreach loop over array earr with
                             // body ebody (in which x may appear free,
			     // standing for the current array element).
      (size earr)            // Size of array earr.
```

This extension should be almost purely syntactic. That is, you should not add a new 'foreach' constructor to the ir::Exp type, but rather extend the parser to recognize the 'foreach' expression form and *desugar* it to a combination of other more primitive constructs (sequencing, 'while' loops, etc.).

One new ir::Exp constructor is required, however, for 'size' expressions, the addition of which will require steps similar to those from step 1, including the addition of a 'size' instruction that pops an array address from the stack and replaces it with the size of the array (as a Vi32) found at that address (or throwing an error if no array metadata is found).

One way to desugar 'foreach' expressions is the following:

```
(foreach x earr ebody)
=>
(let i (alloc 1 0)
  (let a earr
    (while (< (get i 0) (size a))
      (let x (get a (get i 0))
        (seq ebody (set i 0 (+ 1 (get a i))))))))
```

where 'i' and 'a' are fresh identifiers. Note that the expression earr should only be evaluated once, so we must evaluate it before the loop and store its result in temporary 'a' (which must be fresh). You may need to do a bit of reorganization to make 'gensym' available for use by the parser so that it can generate fresh names for identifiers. We use a single-element array for the counter variable 'i' so that it can be updated after each iteration.

Building large expressions "by hand" can be very painful in Rust due to the amount of boxing and cloning that is necessary. There's a trick to make this desugaring step more manageable by hooking back into the parser, more details of which may be given in the PA5 lab session.

## Option 2

This option is worth up to 5 points.

Implement a typechecker for GrumpyIR according to the type system given in the [static semantics](../doc/grumpyIR_static.pdf) document.

Test cases in the option_2_tests/fail directory are expected to throw a type error, and the ones in option_2_tests/pass are expected to successfully typecheck.

## Submission
   
You can accept the assignment [here](https://classroom.github.com/a/mIrr47F0).

The template contains only test cases -- you should use your implementation of PA4 as the starting point. If your PA4 solution isn't complete then you may need to make some corrections in order to proceed with option 1. Alternatively, you can choose option 2 instead since it doesn't depend on the compiler from PA4, but no template code is provided so it will take a bit of work to set up (dealing with function environments will take some thought, in particular supporting recursive function definitions).
